The Victorians, realizing that the greatest happiness accorded to man is that
provided by a happy marriage, endeavoured to pretend that all their marriages
were happy. We, for our part, admitting the fact that no feat of intelligence and
character is so exacting as that required of two people who desire to live per-
manently together on a basis of amity, are obsessed by the problem of how to
render the basic facts of cohabitation simpler and more reasonable, in order that
unhappy marriages may less frequently result. The Victorians would have con-
sidered it 'painful' or 'unpleasant' were one to point out that only four marriages
out of every ten are anything but forced servitudes. We ourselves start from this
very assumption and try to build from it a theory of more sensible relations be-
tween the sexes. Of all forms of arrant untruthfulness Victorian optimism ap-
pears to me to have been the most cowardly and the most damaging.
Truth, therefore, is an attitude of the mind. lt is important, if one does not
wish to inconvenience and to bore one's friends, not to tell lies. But it is more
important not to think lies, or to slide into those mechanical and untruthful
habits of thought which are so pleasant and so easy as descents to mental inepti-
tude. The victorian habit of mind (which I consider to have been a bad habit of
mind) was unduly preoccupied by what was socially and morally convenient.
Convenience is, however, in all affairs of life, an execrable test of value. One
should have the courage to think uncomfortably, since it is only by rejecting the
convenient that one can come to think the truth.
Not, after all, that there is any such thing as truth. At best we can approach
to some relative approximation. On the other hand, there is surely such a thing
as untruth. One is generally aware when one has said something, or acted in some
way which has left on other people an impression not strictly in accordance with
the facts. One is generally aware, also. when one has thrust aside an inconvenient
thought and slid into its place another thought which is convenient. One's
awareness in the former case is in general more acute than in the latter, since we
are more on the look-out for the lies we utter than for those we merely think. In
fact, however, it is the untruthful thought which is the more vicious of the two.
Spoken lies are invariably tiresome and may actually be dishonest. But con-
tinuous lying in the mind, a disease to which the Anglo-Saxon is peculiarly ex-
posed, spells the destruction of human thought and character.