One of the greatest advances in modern
technology has been the invention of
computers. They are already widely used
in industry and in universities and the
time may come when it will be possible
for ordinary people to use them as well.
Computers are capable of doing extre-
mely complicated work in all branches of
learning. They can solve the most com-
plex mathematical problems or put
thousands of unrelated facts in order.
These machines can be put to varied uses.
For instance, they can provide informa-
tion on the best way to prevent traffic
accidents, or they can count the number
of times the word 'and' has been used in
the Bible. Because they work accurately and at high speeds, they save research
workers years of hard work. This whole process by which machines can be used
to work for us has been called automation. In the future, automation may enable
human beings to enjoy far more leisure than they do today. The coming of
automation is bound to have important social consequences.
Some time ago an expert,on automation, Sir Leon Bagrit, pointed out that it
was a mistake to believe that these machines could 'think'. There is no pos-
sibility that human beings will be 'controlled by machines'. Though computers
are capable of learning from their mistakes and improving on their performance
they need detailed instructions from human beings in order to be able to operate.
They can never, as it were, lead independent lives, or 'rule the world' by making
decisions of their own.
Sir Leon said that in the future, computers would be developed which would
be small enough to carry in the pocket. Ordinary people would then be able to
use them to obtain valuable information. Computers could be plugged into a
national network and be used like radios. For instance, people going on holiday
could be informed about weather conditions; car drivers could be given alter-
native routes when there are traffic jams. It will also be possible to make tiny
translating machines. This will enable people who do not share a common
language to talk to each other without any difficulty or to read foreign publi-
cations. It is impossible to assess the importance of a machine of this sort, for
many international misunderstandings are caused simply through our failure to
understand each other. Computers will also be used in hospitals. By providing
a machine with a patient's symptoms, a doctor will be able to diagnose the
nature of his illness. Similarly, machines could be used to keep a check on a
patient's health record and bring it up to date. Doctors will therefore have
immediate access to a great many facts which will help them in their work.
Book-keepers and accountants, too, could be relieved of dull clerical work, for
the tedious task of compiling and checking lists of figures could be done entirely
by machines. Computers are the most efficient servants man has ever had and
there is no limit to the way they can be used to improve our lives.
