From the seventeenth-century empire of Sweden, the story of a galleon that
sank at the start of her maiden voyage in 1628 must be one of the strangest tales
of the sea. For nearly three and a half centuries she lay at the bottom of Stock-
holm harbour until her discovery in 1956. This was the Vasa, royal flagship of
the great imperial fleet.
King Gustavus Adolphus, 'The Northern Hurricane', then at the height of
his military success in the Thirty Years' War, had dictated her measurements
and armament. Triple gun-decks mounted sixty-four bronze cannon. She was
intended to play a leading role in the growing might of Sweden.
As she was prepared for her maiden voyage on August 10, 1628, Stockholm
was in a ferment. From the Skeppsbron and surrounding islands the people
watched this thing of beauty begin to spread her sails and catch the wind. They
had laboured for three years to produce this floating work of art; she was more
richly carved and ornamented than any previous ship. The high stern castle was
a riot of carved gods, demons, knights, kings, warriors,mermaids, cherubs; and
zoomorphic animal shapes ablaze with red and gold and blue, symbols of courage,
power, and cruelty, were portrayed to stir the imaginations of the superstitious
sailors of the day.
Then the cannons of the anchored warships thundered a salute to which the
Vasa fired in reply. As she emerged from her drifting cloud of gun smoke with
the water churned to foam beneath her bow, her flags flying, pennants waving,
sails filling in the breeze, and the red and gold of her superstructure ablaze with
colour, she presented a more majestic spectacle than Stockholmers had ever seen
before. All gun-ports were open and the muzzles peeped wickedly from them.
As the wind freshened there came a sudden squall and the ship made a strange
movement, listing to port. The Ordnance Officer ordered all the port cannon to
be heaved to starboard to counteract the list, but the steepening angle of the decks
increased. Then the sound of rumbling thunder reached the watchers on the
shore, as cargo, ballast, ammunition and 400 people went sliding and crashing
down to the port side of the steeply listing ship. The lower gun-ports were now
below water and the inrush sealed the ship's fate. In that first glorious hour, the
mighty Vasa, which was intended to rule the Baltic, sank with all flags flying--in
the harbour of her birth.