Populations increase and decrease relatively not only to one another, but also to
natural resources. In most parts of the world, the relation between population
and resources is already unfavourable and will probably become even more un-
favourable in the future. This growing poverty in the midst of growing poverty
constitutes a permanent menace to peace. And not only to peace, but also to
democratic institutions and personal liberty. For overpopulation is not com-
patib1e with freedom. An unfavourable relationship between numbers and re-
sources tends to make the earning of a living almost intolerably difficult. Labour
is more abundant than goods, and the individual is compelled to work long hours
for little pay. No surplus of accumulated purchasing power stands between him
and the tyrannies of unfriendly nature or of the equally unfriendly wielders of
political and economic power. Democracy is, among other things, the ability to
say 'no' to the boss. But a man cannot say 'no' to the boss, unless he is sure of
being able to eat when the boss's favour has been withdrawn. And he cannot be
certain of his next meal unless he owns the means of producing enough wealth,
for his family to live on, or has been able to accumulate a surplus out of past
wages, or has a chance of moving to virgin territories, where he can make a fresh
start. In an overcrowded country, very few people own enough to make them
financially independent; very few are in a position to accumulate purchasing
power; and there is no free land. Moreover, in any country where population
presses hard upon natural resources, the general economic situation is apt to be
so precarious that government control of capital and labour, production and con-
sumption, becomes inevitable. It is no accident that the twentieth century should
be the century of highly centralized governments and totalitarian dictatorships;
it had to be so for the simple reason that the twentieth century is the century of 
planetary overcrowding.