After millennia of growth so slow that each generation hardly noticed it, the
cities are suddenly racing off in every direction. The world population goes up
by two per cent a year, city population goes up by four per cent a year, but in
big cities the rate may be as much as five and six per cent a year. To give only
one example of almost visible acceleration, Athens today grows by three dwellings
And 100 square metres of road every hour. There is no reason to believe that this
pace will slacken. As technology gradually swallows up all forms of work, indus-
trial and agricultural, the rural areas are going to shrink, just as they have shrunk
in Britain, and the vast majority of their people will move into the city. In fact,
in Britain now only about four or five per cent of people live in rural areas and
depend upon them; all through the developing world the vanguard of the rural
exodus has reached the urban fringes already, and there they huddle, migrants
in the favellas and barrios of Latin America, in shanty towns in Africa, in those
horrifying encampments one sees on the outskirts of Calcutta and Bombay. We
are heading towards an urban world.
This enormous increase will go ahead whatever we do, and we have to remem-
ber that the new cities devour space. People now acquire far more goods and
things. There is a greater density of household goods; they demand more ser-
vices such as sewage and drainage. Above all the car changes everything: rising
incomes and rising populations can make urban car density increase by some-
thing like four and five per cent in a decade; traffic flows rise to fill whatever
scale of highways are provided for them. The car also has a curious ambivalence:
it creates and then it destroys mobility. The car tempts people further out and
then gives them the appalling problem of getting back. It makes them believe
they can spend Sunday in Brighton, but makes it impossible for them to return
before, say, two in the morning. People go further and further away to reach
open air and countryside which continuously recedes from them, and just as
their working weeks decline and they begin to have more time for leisure,they
find they cannot get to the open spaces or the recreation or the beaches which
they now have the time to enjoy.
Recently some studies were made in the behaviour of mice when exposed to
more than a certain degree of density, frustration, and noise, and the mice just
became deranged. I think some sociologists wonder whether it might not be the
same for men. This combination of very high density of population, goods and
services, and machines, all increasing with almost bruta1 speed, does account for
some really antisocial tendencies in modern urban growth.